README.md, before:

# aada-tokens-staking

## About

This repository hosts on-chain code part of aada-lend project.

### Project structure

- `app/` - Exectuable files
- `src/` - Smartcontracts. Files ending with Nft are minting policies.
- `test/` - Files for testing project.

### System Actors

- Borrower
- Lender

### Use cases

#### Borrower can

- Create loan request
- Cancel loan request
- Return loan

#### Lender can

- Lend
- Liquidate borrower loan by taking collateral
- Retrieve loan and loan interest

### Requirements

#### Aada lend smartcontract part

- Up until loan is given Borrower should always be able to cancel his loan request.
- When canceling loan request Borrower should always be able to get all of his collateral back.
- Only Borrowers Nft owner can cancel loan request. Loan request can be canceled only if Borrowers nft is burnt.
- Loan receiver is identified by data encoded with datum.
- Loan request is created by locking collateral funds into  Request.hs  smartcontract together with datum.
- Borrower must provide this information when creating request:

```haskell
data Datum = Datum
    { borrowersNFT          :: !CurrencySymbol     -- collateral provider id
    , borrowersPkh          :: !PaymentPubKeyHash  -- who shall get loan
    , loantn                :: !TokenName          -- loan asset token name
    , loancs                :: !CurrencySymbol     -- loan asset currency symbol
    , loanamnt              :: !Integer            -- amount of loan
    , interesttn            :: !TokenName          -- interest asset token name
    , interestcs            :: !CurrencySymbol     -- interest currency symbol
    , interestamnt          :: !Integer            -- amount of interest
    , collateralcs          :: !CurrencySymbol     -- collateral currency symbol
    , repayinterval         :: !POSIXTime          -- repay interval
    , liquidateNft          :: !CurrencySymbol     -- liquidation oracle id
    , requestExp            :: !POSIXTime          -- loan request expiration
    , collateraltn          :: !TokenName          -- collateral token name
    , collateralamnt        :: !Integer            -- amount of collateral
    , collateralFactor      :: !Integer            -- Colalteral factor used for liquidation
    , liquidationCommission :: !Integer            -- How much % borrower will pay for lender when liquidated (before time passes)
    } deriving Show
```

- Lender can get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral only when loan is given to borrower and collateral funds are
transfered to `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if loan is not given to owner of **PaymentPubKeyHash** which
is encoded in `Request.hs` smartcontract datum.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if 1 time NFT is not sent to `Collateral.hs`.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if collateral from `Request.hs` smartcontract is not
transfered to `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if datum provided with `Request.hs` is different than
datum provided to `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if 2 Lender NFTs are not minted and one of them is not
locked into `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't retrieve collateral from `Collateral.hs` if **repayinterval** didn't pass and 1 timenft is not burnt or
datum provided liquidate nft is not minted/burnt unless liqudation OracleNft is burnt.
- Lender can't retrieve collateral from `Collateral.hs` if 2 Lender Nfts are not burnt and one of them is not from
`Collateral.hs` smart contract.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if borrowers nft encoded in datum is not burnt.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if loan is not sent to `Interest.hs` smartcontract.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if enough interest is not sent to `Interest.hs` smartcontract.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if Lender nft is not sent to `Interest.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't retrieve his interest from `Interest.hs` smartcontract if 2 Lender Nfts are not burnt and one of them
is not from `Interest.hs` smart contract.
- If Borrower returns laon sooner than **repayinterval** he only needs to pay `(current time - loan taken time) / repay`
interval amount of interest.

#### Nfts minting requirements

##### Borrower nft

- It shouldn't be possible to mint more than one Nft at a time
- It shouldn't be possible to have two Nfts with same CurrencySymbol
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Borrower nft with other token name than  66 -> B

##### Lender Nft

- It shouldn't be possible to mint other than 2 Nfts at a time
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Nft if 1 of them is not sent to  Collateral.hs  smartcontract
- Only two Nfts can be burnt at a time
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Lender nft with other token name than  76 -> L

##### Time Nft

- It shouldn't be possible to mint Time Nft with other token name than POSIXTime provided as a NFT parameter
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Time Nft with bigger time than provided with POSIXTime and than the time which is
currently present

## Installation

### For M1 mac users

M1 Macs uses different instruction set (Arm is RISC) than the usuall Intel or AMD processors (CISC - Complex Instruction Set Computing).
As of writing this readme I haven't managed to make this project work and compile out of the box on M1 Mac and to solve that one solution I have found to work is by using virtualization with 
[lima-vm](https://github.com/lima-vm/lima)

Steps to set up environment for using `lima-vm`:

1. Install `lima-vm`
2. Launch lima and select ubuntu image
3. Edit default lima-vm config. Most import parts are:
  - Memory. I had 4GiB at first and it wasn't enough, but once I set it to 8Gib everything went smoothly
  - Arch. `x86_64`
  - Mounts - writeable: set it to `True`
4. Open lima
5. Dont forget to apt update
6. Install `nix`
7. Download `ghcup` dependencies. (These ghcup steps are probably optional because we are using nix? But its nice to have ghci at hand)
8. Download and install haskell with `ghcup`
9. Set up [nix cache](https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus-apps#nix-1) inside lima instance
10. Clone [plutus repo](https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus-apps). `nix-shell`
11. Clone this repository. Cd into it. Cabal build.

It does work slower than native, but it works.

Example `lima-vm` resulting configuration file `lima.yaml`:
```
arch: x86_64
images:
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release-20220201/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-amd64.img"
  arch: "x86_64"
  digest: "sha256:73fe1785c60edeb506f191affff0440abcc2de02420bb70865d51d0ff9b28223"
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release-20220201/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-arm64.img"
  arch: "aarch64"
  digest: "sha256:1b5b3fe616e1eea4176049d434a360344a7d471f799e151190f21b0a27f0b424"
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-amd64.img"
  arch: "x86_64"
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-arm64.img"
  arch: "aarch64"
cpus: null
memory: 12GiB
disk: null
mounts:
- location: "~"
  writable: true
  sshfs:
    cache: null
    followSymlinks: null
- location: "/tmp/lima"
  writable: true
ssh:
  localPort: 0
  loadDotSSHPubKeys: null
  forwardAgent: null
containerd:
  system: null
  user: null
cpuType:
  aarch64: null
  x86_64: null
firmware:
  legacyBIOS: null
video:
  display: null
networks:
propagateProxyEnv: null
hostResolver:
  enabled: null
  ipv6: null
```

## Prerequisites

If using docker install docker.

## Usage

### Get repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/aada-finance/aada-finance.git
cd aada-finance
```

### Build image

```bash
docker build -t aada_lend .
```

### Compile smartcontracts

Compile and create validators:

```bash
docker run -v <host_directory>:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/compile-validators <validation_script_name>"
```

### Compile minting script

General:
```bash
docker run -v <host_directory>:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-<option>-nft <minting_script_name> <utxo>"
```

Options:
- `mint-borrower-nft <utxo>`. Script name -> `<utxo>.borrowernft`
- `mint-lender-nft <utxo>`. Script name -> `<utxo>.lendernft`
- `mint-time-nft`. Script name -> `policyscript.timenft`

Example:
```bash
docker run -v /home/user/Programming/aada-finance:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-lender-nft 0a630191d2ba7fa96ecdc9096b826a1f9c210028e02fabc9c0288e2e37d3e2b8#0.borrowernft"
```

### Compile OracleNft minting script

General:
```bash
docker run -v <host_directory>:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-oracle-nft <pkh1> <pkh2> <pkh3> <valh> <tn>"
```

Options:
- `pkh1 -> PubKeyHash of party which mush sign to mint this Nft`
- `pkh2 -> PubKeyHash of party which mush sign to mint this Nft`
- `pkh3 -> PubKeyHash of party which mush sign to mint this Nft`
- `valh -> ValidatorHash where Nft Must be sent to be minted`
- `tn -> TokenName for Nft to be minted`

Example:
```bash
docker run -v /home/user/Programming/aada-finance:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-oracle-nft ff ff ff ff ff"
```
### Generate OracleNft example

Inside project
```bash
cabal run generate-example-jsons
```

In docker:
```bash
docker run -v /home/user/Programming/aada-finance:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/generate-example-jsons"
```


### Run tests

```
cabal test
```

## Contribution guide

### Have a proposal?

Raise an issue with a title `proposal - <proposal name>`!

Use this template:
```
# <Proposal name>

## What would you like to be different?

## Why do you think this change would improve this project?
```

### Have a suggested change?

1. Raise a proposal issue
2. Create tests to cover changes
3. Implement changes
4. Make sure nothing breaks
5. Create PR
6. Wait for approval

### Found a bug?

Raise an issue with a title `bug - <bug name>`!

Use this template:
```
# <bug name>

## Your setup

## What is not working as expected?

## What behaviour did you expect?

## What do you think is causing unexpected behaviour?

## How do you think this problem could be resolved?
```

## Contact us

[discord](https://discord.gg/rzVMbFWw)

[telegram](https://t.me/aadacommunity)

[twitter](https://twitter.com/AadaFinance)

[repo manager](https://github.com/tomazvila)

- email: `tomas@aada.finance`

Commit message:

Update README with loan expiration addition

README.md, after:

# aada-tokens-staking

## About

This repository hosts on-chain code part of aada-lend project.

### Project structure

- `app/` - Exectuable files
- `src/` - Smartcontracts. Files ending with Nft are minting policies.
- `test/` - Files for testing project.

### System Actors

- Borrower
- Lender

### Use cases

#### Borrower can

- Create loan request
- Cancel loan request
- Return loan

#### Lender can

- Lend
- Liquidate borrower loan by taking collateral
- Retrieve loan and loan interest

### Requirements

#### Aada lend smartcontract part

- Up until loan is given Borrower should always be able to cancel his loan request.
- When canceling loan request Borrower should always be able to get all of his collateral back.
- Only Borrowers Nft owner can cancel loan request. Loan request can be canceled only if Borrowers nft is burnt.
- Loan receiver is identified by data encoded with datum.
- Loan request is created by locking collateral funds into  Request.hs  smartcontract together with datum.
- Borrower must provide this information when creating request:

```haskell
data Datum = Datum
    { borrowersNFT          :: !CurrencySymbol     -- collateral provider id
    , borrowersPkh          :: !PaymentPubKeyHash  -- who shall get loan
    , loantn                :: !TokenName          -- loan asset token name
    , loancs                :: !CurrencySymbol     -- loan asset currency symbol
    , loanamnt              :: !Integer            -- amount of loan
    , interesttn            :: !TokenName          -- interest asset token name
    , interestcs            :: !CurrencySymbol     -- interest currency symbol
    , interestamnt          :: !Integer            -- amount of interest
    , collateralcs          :: !CurrencySymbol     -- collateral currency symbol
    , repayinterval         :: !POSIXTime          -- repay interval
    , liquidateNft          :: !CurrencySymbol     -- liquidation oracle id
    , requestExp            :: !POSIXTime          -- loan request expiration
    , collateraltn          :: !TokenName          -- collateral token name
    , collateralamnt        :: !Integer            -- amount of collateral
    , collateralFactor      :: !Integer            -- Colalteral factor used for liquidation
    , liquidationCommission :: !Integer            -- How much % borrower will pay for lender when liquidated (before time passes)
    , requestExpiration     :: !POSIXTime          -- Time loan request is valid to
    } deriving Show
```

- Lender can get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral only when loan is given to borrower and collateral funds are
transfered to `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if loan is not given to owner of **PaymentPubKeyHash** which
is encoded in `Request.hs` smartcontract datum.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if 1 time NFT is not sent to `Collateral.hs`.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if collateral from `Request.hs` smartcontract is not
transfered to `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if datum provided with `Request.hs` is different than
datum provided to `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't get Vesting rights to borrowers collateral if 2 Lender NFTs are not minted and one of them is not
locked into `Collateral.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't retrieve collateral from `Collateral.hs` if **repayinterval** didn't pass and 1 timenft is not burnt or
datum provided liquidate nft is not minted/burnt unless liqudation OracleNft is burnt.
- Lender can't retrieve collateral from `Collateral.hs` if 2 Lender Nfts are not burnt and one of them is not from
`Collateral.hs` smart contract.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if borrowers nft encoded in datum is not burnt.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if loan is not sent to `Interest.hs` smartcontract.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if enough interest is not sent to `Interest.hs` smartcontract.
- Borrower can't retrieve his collateral if Lender nft is not sent to `Interest.hs` smartcontract.
- Lender can't retrieve his interest from `Interest.hs` smartcontract if 2 Lender Nfts are not burnt and one of them
is not from `Interest.hs` smart contract.
- If Borrower returns laon sooner than **repayinterval** he only needs to pay `(current time - loan taken time) / repay`
interval amount of interest.
- Lender shouldn't be able to provide loan to borrower if loan request has expired.

#### Nfts minting requirements

##### Borrower nft

- It shouldn't be possible to mint more than one Nft at a time
- It shouldn't be possible to have two Nfts with same CurrencySymbol
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Borrower nft with other token name than  66 -> B

##### Lender Nft

- It shouldn't be possible to mint other than 2 Nfts at a time
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Nft if 1 of them is not sent to  Collateral.hs  smartcontract
- Only two Nfts can be burnt at a time
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Lender nft with other token name than  76 -> L

##### Time Nft

- It shouldn't be possible to mint Time Nft with other token name than POSIXTime provided as a NFT parameter
- It shouldn't be possible to mint Time Nft with bigger time than provided with POSIXTime and than the time which is
currently present

## Installation

### For M1 mac users

M1 Macs uses different instruction set (Arm is RISC) than the usuall Intel or AMD processors (CISC - Complex Instruction Set Computing).
As of writing this readme I haven't managed to make this project work and compile out of the box on M1 Mac and to solve that one solution I have found to work is by using virtualization with 
[lima-vm](https://github.com/lima-vm/lima)

Steps to set up environment for using `lima-vm`:

1. Install `lima-vm`
2. Launch lima and select ubuntu image
3. Edit default lima-vm config. Most import parts are:
  - Memory. I had 4GiB at first and it wasn't enough, but once I set it to 8Gib everything went smoothly
  - Arch. `x86_64`
  - Mounts - writeable: set it to `True`
4. Open lima
5. Dont forget to apt update
6. Install `nix`
7. Download `ghcup` dependencies. (These ghcup steps are probably optional because we are using nix? But its nice to have ghci at hand)
8. Download and install haskell with `ghcup`
9. Set up [nix cache](https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus-apps#nix-1) inside lima instance
10. Clone [plutus repo](https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus-apps). `nix-shell`
11. Clone this repository. Cd into it. Cabal build.

It does work slower than native, but it works.

Example `lima-vm` resulting configuration file `lima.yaml`:
```
arch: x86_64
images:
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release-20220201/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-amd64.img"
  arch: "x86_64"
  digest: "sha256:73fe1785c60edeb506f191affff0440abcc2de02420bb70865d51d0ff9b28223"
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release-20220201/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-arm64.img"
  arch: "aarch64"
  digest: "sha256:1b5b3fe616e1eea4176049d434a360344a7d471f799e151190f21b0a27f0b424"
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-amd64.img"
  arch: "x86_64"
- location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/21.10/release/ubuntu-21.10-server-cloudimg-arm64.img"
  arch: "aarch64"
cpus: null
memory: 12GiB
disk: null
mounts:
- location: "~"
  writable: true
  sshfs:
    cache: null
    followSymlinks: null
- location: "/tmp/lima"
  writable: true
ssh:
  localPort: 0
  loadDotSSHPubKeys: null
  forwardAgent: null
containerd:
  system: null
  user: null
cpuType:
  aarch64: null
  x86_64: null
firmware:
  legacyBIOS: null
video:
  display: null
networks:
propagateProxyEnv: null
hostResolver:
  enabled: null
  ipv6: null
```

## Prerequisites

If using docker install docker.

## Usage

### Get repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/aada-finance/aada-finance.git
cd aada-finance
```

### Build image

```bash
docker build -t aada_lend .
```

### Compile smartcontracts

Compile and create validators:

```bash
docker run -v <host_directory>:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/compile-validators <validation_script_name>"
```

### Compile minting script

General:
```bash
docker run -v <host_directory>:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-<option>-nft <minting_script_name> <utxo>"
```

Options:
- `mint-borrower-nft <utxo>`. Script name -> `<utxo>.borrowernft`
- `mint-lender-nft <utxo>`. Script name -> `<utxo>.lendernft`
- `mint-time-nft`. Script name -> `policyscript.timenft`

Example:
```bash
docker run -v /home/user/Programming/aada-finance:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-lender-nft 0a630191d2ba7fa96ecdc9096b826a1f9c210028e02fabc9c0288e2e37d3e2b8#0.borrowernft"
```

### Compile OracleNft minting script

General:
```bash
docker run -v <host_directory>:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-oracle-nft <pkh1> <pkh2> <pkh3> <valh> <tn>"
```

Options:
- `pkh1 -> PubKeyHash of party which mush sign to mint this Nft`
- `pkh2 -> PubKeyHash of party which mush sign to mint this Nft`
- `pkh3 -> PubKeyHash of party which mush sign to mint this Nft`
- `valh -> ValidatorHash where Nft Must be sent to be minted`
- `tn -> TokenName for Nft to be minted`

Example:
```bash
docker run -v /home/user/Programming/aada-finance:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/mint-oracle-nft ff ff ff ff ff"
```
### Generate OracleNft example

Inside project
```bash
cabal run generate-example-jsons
```

In docker:
```bash
docker run -v /home/user/Programming/aada-finance:/app aada_lend bash -c "/usr/local/bin/generate-example-jsons"
```


### Run tests

```
cabal test
```

## Contribution guide

### Have a proposal?

Raise an issue with a title `proposal - <proposal name>`!

Use this template:
```
# <Proposal name>

## What would you like to be different?

## Why do you think this change would improve this project?
```

### Have a suggested change?

1. Raise a proposal issue
2. Create tests to cover changes
3. Implement changes
4. Make sure nothing breaks
5. Create PR
6. Wait for approval

### Found a bug?

Raise an issue with a title `bug - <bug name>`!

Use this template:
```
# <bug name>

## Your setup

## What is not working as expected?

## What behaviour did you expect?

## What do you think is causing unexpected behaviour?

## How do you think this problem could be resolved?
```

## Contact us

[discord](https://discord.gg/rzVMbFWw)

[telegram](https://t.me/aadacommunity)

[twitter](https://twitter.com/AadaFinance)

[repo manager](https://github.com/tomazvila)

- email: `tomas@aada.finance`
